Is he there?
Yes, Martin. Okay. Um, Martin, can you hear me?
Yes, I can hear you. Thank you. I'm speaking to,
Oh, that's great. All
right. Uh, you have five minutes to speak
to your submission and if there is any time left,
there might be questions from members.
Thank you.
Thank you. So, uh,
I'm not sure if you can actually see me.
No, we can't. If you, uh, wish to turn your video on,
that is up to you, but otherwise it's fine.
Oh, now we can see you as well. That's great. Thank you.
So apologies for my appearance.
I have just come in from my volunteering for
Birthright and St.
Vincent de Paul, so apologies for that. And all good.
To start off with, I would like to know
what the business problem is that these changes
would like to address,
because in my reading, I have yet
to see a succinct definition of a problem that needs
to be addressed.
That's the first question that I had.
And based on that, the,
or from that point of view, when I read through this,
I see, um, a reaction to a
pseudo problem or something that might or could happen.
And I feel that there's, uh, a little bit
of a, a lack of learning from the area that we've just,
or the time period that we've just been through
around the COVID debacle that we've actually had.
We've had the COVID Commission of Inquiry.
Uh, we've had two of them actually.
And I believe that this extension of the,
uh, of the framework of surveillance seems to be,
uh, dominating this, uh,
these changes that are coming in.
And I, I feel that there's a little bit of an overstep of,
uh, our, uh, rights to privacy
on the communication that I actually have with other people.
I might not agree with everybody else that I have a,
a problem with, but it is in a frank discussion
that we actually come to a solution
and having a surveillance mechanism
that in actual fact intercepts the, um, the communication
between two parties be those parties either in New Zealand
or external, I think is a little bit of an overreach.
And I think as well that the, the effect of
that on the technology industry is going to,
in actual effect, be detrimental to New Zealand
because New Zealand's not a very large population when taken
in consideration of the rest of the world.
And as soon as you start putting restrictions on, um,
applications like Signal
or WhatsApp that require a backdoor entry for surveillance,
that doesn't actually, um, bode well for the people
of New Zealand that are using these apps for
their own private, in the private inter interactions.
So, uh, that's a big part that for me
is, uh, a major concern.
The other part is that there seems to be a, uh,
a desire to have a super,
uh, bureaucrat decide on what is
and what isn't actually correct.
And yes, there is mention of having evidentiary, um,
evidence of all verifiable, uh, proof
of some kind, but then I think back to COVID
where we were also told things are safe and effective,
but in actual fact they weren't.
So which evidence
and who decides what evidence is natural
fact correct or not?
And I feel there's a little bit of a continuation of
that same thinking that somebody in, um,
a bureau of some kind can just make these decisions.
Then that raises for me the next question as
to the accountability of that person's decision making
and, um, what are the checks and balances available.
So in all, I'm extremely hesitant
to even think that there is,
and that's why I come back to the question
of what's the problem
and is this an overreaction to something?
And I think of the, um, unfortunate
situation in Christchurch
where we had the Christchurch shooting
and the net reaction to that
and that reaction of, uh, banning guns.
Well, guns don't actually do something.
It's the people that are holding the guns that do things.
And the same thing. Martin here,
Sorry to interrupt Martin,
but we have run out of time for your submission.
Uh, thank you so much for your contribution
and I only just got going.
Thank you. Um, take care. Bye-bye.
Uh, next is Voices for Freedom. Are there? Yeah.
Hello. Good morning. I'm just checking
that you can hear me.
Yes, we can hear you. Um, be,
I'm just putting on the video as well. Thank you.
Oh, good. Now we can kind of see you.
Yeah, now we can see you. That's all good.
So we have 10 minutes with you. Thank you so much.
If, and thank you, I've spoken to you submission,
there might be some questions for members.
Wonderful. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Uh, and thank you for the opportunity to speak, uh,
to our submissions.
Uh, I am Katie Ash, b Coppins, head of Legal for Voices
for Freedom and Reality Check Radio.
Voices for Freedom is a grassroots not-for-profit
advocacy organization
with over a hundred thousand supporters nationwide.
Reality Check Radio is an independent digital broadcaster
based in New Zealand, but reaching hundreds of thousands
of listeners both nationally and internationally.
Between us, we represent communities
who experience firsthand
what happens when policy decisions are made quickly framed
as technical or necessary,
but with sufficient attention to proportionality rights,
safeguards, and long-term consequences.
We are, of course, speaking about the COVID era
of government, which we will be making reference
to throughout this, this submission.
These submissions are not theoretical for us.
We operate, communicate, broadcast,
and engage entirely within the digital ecosystem that this,
that these bills will regulate.
And we are concerned about what the bills actually do.
The telecommunications and other matters.
Amendment bill does not create a new framework.
It amends existing acts in ways
that expand jurisdictional reach, interception obligations,
and enforcement mechanisms.
It explicitly, explicitly extends obligations
to overseas providers.
It explicitly strengthens enforcement
through non court mechanisms,
and it expressly reinforces interception obligations under
the telecommunications interception capability
and security legislation framed individually,
these changes may appear technical,
but read together they materially shift the balance of power
between the state communications
infrastructure and citizens.
Our primary concern is not
that government regulates telecommunications, it's
how enforcement power is being expanded without equivalent
safeguards, proportionality, transparency,
or independent oversight.
The bill introduces a bespoke enforcement mechanism
precisely because court based enforcement is considered
impractical, particularly with offshore providers
that should confer Concern this committee.
It certainly concerns us
when enforcement mechanisms are designed
to bypass traditional legal process.
The third independent branch of government,
including judicial oversight.
The risk is not just misuse. We have seen this before.
During COVID, broad discretionary powers were exercised
through orders and administrative mechanisms
with limited parliamentary scrutiny
and delayed judicial review.
By the time legal challenges were heard,
the practical consequences had already
occurred as to encryption.
Strong encryption is not niche technology.
It protects journalists, whistleblowers, sources,
broadcasters, people, families, and even politicians.
Any obligation even indirect that pressures providers
to weaken encryption or facilitate access
introduces systemic risk.
I have to say clearly there is no such thing
as a safe backdoor.
Once communications infrastructure is shaped
around potential access rather than assured privacy,
people do change how they speak, not
because they're doing anything wrong, but
because uncertainty about surveillance alters behaviors
discourages canor and chills lawful expression.
We saw this chilling effect
during COVID-19 when health professionals, teachers
and public servants reported self-censoring their views,
fearing professional or regulatory consequences rather than
any legal wrongdoing.
Extending obligations offshore also does not
simply level the plaing fee.
It favors large multinational platforms
that can absorb compliance costs, redesign systems,
and negotiate directly with governments.
Smaller privacy focused services often leave smaller
markets altogether.
They result in less choice, greater centralization
and communications increasingly mediated
by platforms structurally aligned
with state compliance expectations.
This mirrors what occurred with Vaccine Pass systems
where access to everyday services became dependent on
digital platforms aligned with the government policy,
effectively outsourcing enforcement
to private infrastructure.
There is clear pattern recognition here.
The bill does not exist in isolation.
Over recent years, new Zealand's have seen repeatedly
reliance on technical
or emergency legislation to expand state reach across health
movement, employment, access to services
and digital systems, particularly during COVID response
measures introduced as temporary as uh,
or exceptional became normalized.
Enforcement powers expanded rapidly
and safeguards often lag behind implementation.
Each step had been justified.
Each step had been described as narrow,
but the cumulative effect was not.
That experience has materially shaped public trust
and should inform this committee on
how it assesses new powers
over communications infrastructure.
I have a number of questions for the committee
to ask itself on enforcement.
What specific safeguards has the committee satisfied exist
to ensure the new enforcement mechanisms cannot be expanded
over time or abused?
Has the committee received advice regarding encryption
that nothing in this bill will place pressure on providers
to weaken, redesign,
or compromise encrypted communication
systems on public trust?
Given the recent experience during COVID,
how has this committee assured itself
that expanded communications enforcement powers will not
further further ERO public trust?
And last of all, on impact has this committee assessed the
cumulative civil liberties impacts
of this bill alongside recent
and proposed legislation affecting digital identification,
surveillance, and communications infrastructure.
We are not asking the committee to reject regulation.
We are asking it to recognize
that communications infrastructure is not neutral.
It shapes speech, trust journal journalism
and democracy itself.
Once enforcement powers are embedded into their
infrastructure, it is extraordinary
difficult to unwind them.
We urge you to proceed with caution, clarity and restraint
and I thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Um,
I think we have some time, uh, for questions.
We do have questions. Question any questions?
Uh, Dr. Deborah Wilson.
Okay. Uh, thank you Katie. Um, very good.
Um, proposal to us or submission to us.
Uh, well thought through, um, two things
that sort of jumped out at me.
One was the no safe backdoor to encryption.
And then I juxtaposed that with your comments around
concentration of discretionary power with limited oversight
and your comments there around what thoughts have we given
to safeguards, proportionality, et cetera.
Two things sort of didn't line up to me so much
because it seemed like the no safe backdoor was
that's at the end do not do anything with encryption.
Um, whereas the other part was you were looking
or even suggesting perhaps there is a way forward in terms
of this committee's considerations around what
that discretionary power could be like
with the right safeguards.
Yes, certainly. So, uh, in relation to a safe back door,
there is always the, uh, potential once that door opened
that it will be misused and taken advantage of.
Uh, and that was talking about the access to, uh, encrypted,
uh, messages and the, like, your telephone conversation
with your wife tonight about what's on for dinner or,
or the like that proportionality element
that we are asking for.
Uh, is that only in very limited circumstances could
proportional could that situation or that involvement
or engagement on private conversations be, uh, you know,
uh, accessed or um, or used.
And by that, I guess we are talking about not just general
overview access to all sorts of encrypted messages.
When you have a court process that requires a, uh, subpoena
to be able to access
that information in very limited circumstances that's gone
through that proportionality assessment,
it's gone through that analysis.
And if there's considered to be conduct that's, uh,
not fitting within other laws, uh, that exist, that
that access can be, uh, can be granted.
But that's certainly set, uh, available in other laws.
What I understand this bill is doing is,
is going even further, much more general, uh, access to, uh,
information and encrypted messages.
Alright, thank you. So that's the bottom line for you.
No access to stop it there. Um, uh, David, sorry.
Uh, thank you so much Katie.
Thanks for your submission and thanks
for answering those questions. Thanks.
Thank you. Have a lovely day.
You too. Uh, we move on to the next,
is it in person or is this in person?
Hello. Thank you so much for your submission.
Is it will Mina,
Will you say Helma Dutch Custom?
They give a long name and then I short.
That's all right. Mine is very long too. So for
Official documents I have to use my
Long Thank you so much. We
have five minutes with you. Yeah, thank you.
Part of this bill opens the door for the governments
to have capabilities which can become a significant threat
to freedom of speeds and association.
It can open the door to censorship in the future.
Striking the appropriate balance between security, privacy,
and open access on social media
and apps is a significant challenge for both com companies
and policy makers.
This balance is very important for the future of privacy
for all New Zealand, the excuse that the government needs
to weaken end-to-end encryption
and a backdoor for so-called threats as terrorism,
child safety, human trafficking, copyright infringement,
drug dealing and tax evasion.
This is an excuse. It is a trillion horse.
It is asking an engineer to design a bridge
to let the good guys across,
but when the bad guys come across,
it automatically collapse.
That is not possible.
Computer and IT technologists have raised this concern
that creating a weakness, metaphorically opening a door of
or shearing encryption keys her her ability
to protect people using online services.
The the ends does not justify the means.
Excuse me. When we talk about
undermining encryptions
and security, despite the focus on encryption,
other options do exist.
Much of the digital content is accessible.
The law enforcement, fire courts, instead of wanting to ween
encryption, it should be preserved
and protected while a measure is taken
to support alternative fact finding mechanism.
Government policy that weakens, weaken
or bypass encryption opens the door to hackers,
disgruntled government employees and cyber criminals.
Any backdoor will serve as attempting targets.
Encryption is fundamental to protecting,
to protecting sensitive information.
If it is undermined personal
and confidential data are exposed,
this bill permanently strengthens
surveillance infrastructure.
By enabling robust enforcements of interception,
it's create a risk that
offshore providers will withdraw from New Zealands,
which weaken our freedom of expression.
In New Zealands, we are entering a time period
that we cannot practice a fair democracy,
an equal citizenship.
This part of the bill that deals
with weakening the end-to-end encryption could still leave
New Zealanders the freedom to post their views.
But in future there is a possibility that
after posting their view, their views,
their freedom is taken away.
The end, the essence
of free speechs is protecting unpopular, unpopular views.
Popular views protect themself.
My recommendation is that at all time,
government agencies will always ask for a subpoena
or a court warrant even if it seems impractical.
Thank you. Members. Any questions?
Looks like no questions. That was good. Thank you so much.
Thank you. We
sit next Michael?
Yeah. Okay.
Can you hear me? Michael?
Has he joined the panel? He said he's there. Yeah.
Michael, we are waiting for you, so if you can hear me,
please, um,
respond. Look like he's able to.
Can you hear me now? Oh, yes,
now we can hear you, but we can't see you.
Uh, but that's fine. We have five minutes with you.
Thank you so much.
Okay. Uh, my issue
is not so much with the detail of this proposed amendment,
but rather, uh,
looking at it from a bigger picture point of view.
And I'm rather concerned that New Zealanders
as a whole are reasonably naive in assuming that
government will remain benign.
And I think there's ample, uh,
evidence just recently
that democracies can turn fairly quickly into Autocracies.
And my concern is that
any established infrastructure, um,
to allow snooping on citizens, um,
and lack of their free communication
and freedom of speech, um, will
allow a bad actor in government, uh, to,
uh, subjugate citizens.
And I think the typical reaction of a New Zealander
to more government power is to say, well,
uh, it's okay by me because I've got nothing to hide.
Uh, and we are uns, we are not suspicious enough of
big Brother coming along and, um, uh, taking over
and using these tool tools to subjugate us.
Um, just recently, for example, uh, in,
in the 21st century democracies that have, that have changed
to autocracies include, uh, Putin's Russia, uh,
Turkey, UR, Dewan, uh, Chavez in Venezuela.
And now Trump seems to be on his way.
Uh, I think that when bad actors get in, the fewer
means we have of allowing them
to completely control citizens, the better.
And this is just one of them.
I guess other ones, uh, that we see already in um,
China are things like C-C-C-T-V facial recognition
that the urge to go cashless societies, uh,
banning firearms as often these autocracies do, they ban
firearm usage by citizens.
Um, these internet surveillance and bans, DNA collection
and identity cards, these are all things
and this is just one extra.
This amendment just allows, um, a
malicious leader to take over
and subjugate the population in general.
And I think we believe
that, uh, that wouldn't happen in New Zealand.
But once again, uh, look at what's happened, um,
now is happening in the USA, whether you like Trump
or not, uh, USA has certainly moving towards autocracy
and, uh, a lot of
democratic institutions are being bent,
uh, by government.
So I guess that's, um, all I have to say, I think we have
to be very, very careful and not allow
infrastructure to be put in place now
that could be used maliciously against
us. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Michael,
we have a question from Scott Willis.
Thank you, Michael. Um, you mentioned that, uh,
you have concerns about government being a bad actor
that might subjugate citizens,
but, uh,
do you have the same concerns about the tech titans, many
of whom, uh, support Trump
and the rise of fascism that they might use our data
to influence and subject subjugate citizens as well?
Uh, possibly.
Um, but at least you've got choices there
to not use them or use someone else.
But if it's your government, um, doing these things to you,
uh, you, you don't have any options.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Michael.
Have a good day. Bye-bye.
My pleasure. Bye. Yeah.
Hello, Megan.
Hello. How you going? Uh, good, thank you.
We have five minutes with you, so it's your time.
So, uh, if there is any time left
after you have spoken to your submission,
there might be some questions from members. Thank you.
Sure. I thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Before I, uh, address the substance of this bill,
I just wanna note something quite small,
but it is telling the submission form itself
contained a spelling error.
Uh, that might seem minor,
you know, missing letter here and there.
But when legislation details, um, when legislation deals
with complex and technical amendments affecting privacy,
surveillance and human rights, fundamental rights,
precision does matter.
Details actually matter.
Okay, now I'm speaking today
because I oppose the telecommunications in other matters
amendment bill in its current form, form.
As a mandated mental health nurse
who has worked within state systems, I understand
how authority functions in practice
expanded powers once introduced.
Rarely contract safeguards written into legislation can
weaken over time through interpretation, enforcement culture
and, uh, simple mission creep.
And once privacy protections are diluted,
they're very difficult to restore this bill risks,
broadening surveillance cap capabilities
and placing pressure on secure encrypted communications.
In New Zealand, strong encryption is not a technical luxury
that protects personal privacy.
And we've had issues with, um, you know, uh, health
databases being breached recently.
Uh, it also protects professional confidentiality,
journalistic integrity, commercial security,
and, uh, democratic participation.
It underpins trust between citizens,
between pre professionals and clients
and between public and the state.
Clear and enforceable limits on state interception powers
are not obstacles to public safety.
They are essential safeguards in a free society.
When governments increase their capacity
to monitor communications, the burden
of justification must be high.
The measures must be proportionate, transparent
and subject to meaningful independent oversight.
New Zealanders value, fairness
and restraint in the use of state power.
If Parliament is to maintain public confidence
or, uh, regain some public confidence,
it must draw a clear line against incremental
digital overreach.
For clarity, my recommendations are as follows.
First, that the committee reject this
bill in its current form.
Second, that any revised legislation
explicitly protects strong end-to-end encryption without
creating direct or indirect mechanisms that weaken it.
Third, that any interception powers be narrowly defined,
strictly limited, and subject to robust,
genuinely independent oversight that cannot be expanded
by administrative interpretation.
And fourth, that consultation on legislation
affecting digital privacy.
Be thorough, transparent,
and allow for meaning, meaningful public engagement.
These are not extreme positions.
They are reasonable guardrails in a democratic society.
Parliament exists to represent the public,
although that's up for debate as well at the moment,
parliament exists to represent us and as a taxpayer
and citizen, I expect legislation of this magnitude
to prioritize fundamental rights, not treat them
as secondary considerations, privacy, autonomy,
and freedom of expression and not abstract principles.
They're founded on trust in a modern democracy. Thank you.
That, that's my comments.
Thank you so much. Uh, question from Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you Megan. Um, for your submission, uh,
you used the words meaningful, independent oversight.
Do you have any ideas about what
that might look like for you?
Not within the government.
If the government is behaved, parliament is, um,
having these bills, putting legislation into place,
there should be a body looking at what's going on without,
um, being your peers.
You know, it's really hard to be over, you know,
overseeing what your friends are doing.
I'm not sovereign. Alright. I good.
Thank you so much, Megan, for your contribu. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye-bye. Thank you. That you Richard? No.
Alright. Uh, so we go into private session then. Thank you.
Oh, we've got Richard. Oh, brilliant.
So Richard, can you come to the table there please?
To the front table here?
Are there, yeah. Yeah.
And we have five minutes with you.
Sure. I probably don't need quite
so long, but that's all right.
Uh, yeah, so if there is any time left,
there might be questions as well.
Thank you. You can get started.
Sure. Um, well, I suppose I came here today
to voice my opposition to the telecommunications
and other matters amendment bill going through primarily
because of the reach in the, uh,
surveillance that it allows for.
So that is the primary opposition that I have for you.
I feel it will lead us a bit more towards, um,
an Orwellian society than I would like.
And yeah, it's generally
that is my opposition to the bill.
Very short and sweet.
Thank you. Um, members, any questions to Richard?
Sure. Um, aena Williams.
Richard, thank you for coming in.
I think, um, most of us would agree with that.
Um, and I guess the thing is, um,
we, we are trying to make sure that the law, you know,
says clearly what, what we think, which is
that those rights are protected.
But, um, you know, how,
how do you think the government should respond to many
of the submissions where we think we,
we are probably on the same page as as much
of what's been suggested, but,
Um, yeah, I I'm certainly happy to answer that one.
Um, there are a great number
of things in many different overlapping bills, which
do seem to be leading us towards what I mentioned earlier.
Um, I would perhaps
like it if you guys were to put all of those things,
and I'm gonna lump a few things in together.
Um, the increase in surveillance, the sharing
between interoperable, uh, the sharing between
intergovernmental and the
FireEyes network of different things.
The, um, AI collection of data
and how that will pertain
to later on when we look at things like digital ID
and digital currencies and things like that.
I would think it might be a bit more transparent
and fair to put them all in one bill
and hold a referendum on them as opposed
to putting little bits in various bills
and hoping they hide there.
Mm-hmm. Uh, good.
Thank you so much, Richard, for
answering that question as well. Cool.
Thank you. Any other questions? No,
There are no questions.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. That's all. Thank you.
Thank you for your contribution. Thanks.
Uh, so we move into private session now. Please.